Document vector indexes (#690)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/indexes-for-vector-search.adoc

| "FINGER: Fast Inference for Graph-based Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search"
| 0.9267876148223877

| "Learning to Route in Similarity Graphs"
| 0.9263730049133301

2+d| Rows: 10

|===

The results are expected, with papers discussing graph-based nearest-neighbor searches.

The most similar to this result is the query vector itself, which is to be expected as the index was queried with an indexed property.
If the query vector itself is not wanted, you can use `WHERE score < 1` to remove equivalent vectors to the query vector.

====

[[indexes-vector-drop]]
== Drop vector indexes

A vector index is dropped by using the xref:indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-drop-an-index[same command as for other indexes], `DROP INDEX`.

.+DROP INDEX+
======

In the following example, you drop the `abstract-embeddings` that you created previously:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
DROP INDEX `abstract-embeddings`
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Removed 1 index.
----

======

[[indexes-vector-set]]
== Set vector property on a node

You can set a vector property, `LIST<FLOAT>`, on a node using the xref:clauses/set.adoc#set-set-a-property[`SET`] command:

.Syntax for setting a vector property

> [source,cypher]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, syntax]
```

----
SET node.propertyKey = vector
----

However, Cypher stores the provided `LIST<FLOAT>` as a primitive array of {ieee-754} _double_ precision values.
Valid vectors for use in the index must have components finitely representable in {ieee-754} _single_ precision.
As a result, it takes up approximately twice as much space.

The {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_create_setVectorProperty[`db.create.setVectorProperty`] procedure is provided to validate and set the property as an array of {ieee-754} single precision values.
As a result, the store's space is approximately halved.

.Signature for `db.create.setVectorProperty` to set a vector property
[source,syntax,role="noheader",indent=0]
----
db.create.setVectorProperty(node :: NODE?, key :: STRING?, vector :: LIST? OF FLOAT?) :: (node :: NODE?)
----

Thus, this is the equivalent syntax for setting a vector with a procedure:

.Syntax for setting a vector _via_ a procedure

> [source,cypher]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, syntax]
```

:fn-ieee-754: footnote:ieee-754[https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229[IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic]]

:link-operations-manual: link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}
:link-procedures-reference: {link-operations-manual}/reference/procedures/

:ieee-754: IEEE 754{fn-ieee-754}

:l2-norm: image:l2.svg["l2"]-norm

[[indexes-vector]]
= Vector search index
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.11._ label:beta[]

This chapter describes how to use vector indexes to perform an approximate nearest neighbor search.

Vector indexes allow users to query vector embeddings from large datasets.
An embedding is a numerical representation of a data object, such as text, image, audio, or document.

For example, each word or token in a text is typically represented as high-dimensional vector where each dimension represents a certain aspect of the word’s meaning.
Words that are semantically similar or related are often represented by vectors that are closer to each other in this vector space.

> This allows for mathematical operations like addition and subtraction to carry semantic meaning; for example, the vector representation of "king" minus "man" plus "woman" might be close to the vector representation of "queen." In other words, vector embeddings can be said to be a numerical representation of a particular data object, capturing its semantic meaning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows for mathematical operations like addition and subtraction to carry semantic meaning.
For example, the vector representation of "king" minus "man" plus "woman" might be close to the vector representation of "queen." 
In other words, vector embeddings can be said to be a numerical representation of a particular data object, capturing its semantic meaning.
```

> The embedding for a particular data object can be generated by for example the https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai[Vertex AI] or https://openai.com/[OpenAI] embedding generators, which can produce vector embeddings with dimensions 768, 1024, 1536, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The embedding for a particular data object can be generated by for example the https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai[Vertex AI] or https://openai.com/[OpenAI] embedding generators, which can produce vector embeddings with dimensions 768, 1024, and 1536.
```

Author: That's now a finite list; different models they provide can produce even more than what was listed (hence the _etc_), but those are the common ones from those generators.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's why I changed it to a finite list, because here we give those two as examples.

Author: I don't know if I was clear, sure there are several models, and several venders, and I listed 2 venders, listing the 3 most common vector dimensions that they'd offer; but they offer _more_ than just those 3.

For completeness
I think VertexAI can do 768 for text and 1408 for multimodal, they used to have 1024 for images, but I cannot find that in their docs anymore.
OpenAI gen1 models could be 1024, 2048, 4096, 12288 ... and their now prefered/recommended gen2 is 1536

so I don't know if a finite list is the right call.
perhaps with a "e.g." (or I guess "for example") as that implies it's not a complete list without using "etc."

> These vector embeddings are stored as `LIST<FLOAT>` properties on a node, where each dimensional component of the vector, is an element in the `LIST`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These vector embeddings are stored as `LIST<FLOAT>` properties on a node, where each dimensional component of the vector is an element in the `LIST`.
```

====

All vectors within the index must have the same dimensionality.
The measure of similarity is determined by the given vector similarity function.
It defines how similar two vectors are to one another by a similarity score, how vectors are interpreted, and what vectors are valid for the index.

A node is indexed if all the following are true:

* The node contains the configured label.
* The node contains the configured property key.
* The respective property value is of type `LIST<FLOAT>`.
* The xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-size[`size()`] of the respective value is the same as the configured dimensionality.
* The value is a valid vector for the configured similarity function.

Otherwise, a node is not indexed.

.Create a vector index
====

For instance, assume you have a graph of research papers, and each paper has an abstract.
You want to find papers in the neighborhood of a paper you know.

.Data model
[source,syntax,role="noheader",indent=0]
----
(:Title)<--(:Paper)-->(:Abstract)
----

Assume for each abstract, you have generated a 1536-dimensional vector `embedding` of the abstract's `text` using Open AI's default model, `text-embedding-ada-002`.

> This model suggests a xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[cosine similarity] (for more information see OpenAI's documentation on https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings/which-distance-function-should-i-use[Which distance function I use?]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This model suggests a xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[cosine similarity].
For more information, see link:https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings/which-distance-function-should-i-use[OpenAI's official documentation].
```

You can create a cosine vector index over the `embedding` property.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.index.vector.createNodeIndex('abstract-embeddings', 'Abstract', 'embedding', 1536, 'cosine')
----

.Result
[queryResult]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

> You can see that the vector index has been created using `SHOW INDEXES`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see that the vector index has been created using `SHOW INDEXES`:
```

| 0.9301378726959229

| "A novel approach to study realistic navigations on networks"
| 0.928106427192688

| "Intentional Walks on Scale Free Small Worlds"
| 0.9274556636810303

| "FINGER: Fast Inference for Graph-based Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search"
| 0.9267876148223877

| "Learning to Route in Similarity Graphs"
| 0.9263730049133301

2+d| Rows: 10

|===

The results are expected, with papers discussing graph-based nearest-neighbor searches.

The most similar to this result is the query vector itself, which is to be expected as the index was queried with an indexed property.
If the query vector itself is not wanted, you can use `WHERE score < 1` to remove equivalent vectors to the query vector.

====

[[indexes-vector-drop]]
== Drop vector indexes

A vector index is dropped by using the xref:indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-drop-an-index[same command as for other indexes], `DROP INDEX`.

.+DROP INDEX+
======

In the following example, you drop the `abstract-embeddings` that you created previously:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
DROP INDEX `abstract-embeddings`
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Removed 1 index.
----

======

[[indexes-vector-set]]

> == Set vector property on a node

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Set a vector property on a node
```

As a result, the store's space is approximately halved.

.Signature for `db.create.setVectorProperty` to set a vector property
[source,syntax,role="noheader",indent=0]
----
db.create.setVectorProperty(node :: NODE?, key :: STRING?, vector :: LIST? OF FLOAT?) :: (node :: NODE?)
----

Thus, this is the equivalent syntax for setting a vector with a procedure:

.Syntax for setting a vector _via_ a procedure
[source,syntax,role="noheader",indent=0]
----
CALL db.create.setVectorProperty(node, 'propertyKey', vector)
----

This is ideal for creating and setting new vector properties in the graph.
Though existing properties can be re-set using this procedure to minimize store size, there is a cost in transaction log size until they are rotated away, especially in the case of record formats.

[[indexes-vector-similarity]]
== Supported similarity functions

The choice of similarity function can vastly differ in which indexed vectors are considered similar, and which are valid.
The semantic meaning of the vector may itself dictate which similarity function to choose.

> Consult the documentation for the particular model used to generate vector embeddings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to the documentation for the particular vector embedding model you are using, as it may suggest a preference for certain similarity functions.
```

> The documentation may suggest a preference for certain similarity functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Otherwise, understanding the differences between different similarity functions can help make a more informed choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, being able to differentiate between the various similarity functions can assist in making a more informed decision.
```

.Similarity functions
[%header,cols="d,m,e"]
|===

> | Name | Case Insensitive Argument | Key similarity feature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Name | Case insensitive argument | Key similarity feature
```

| xref:#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[Euclidean]
| "euclidean"
| distance

| xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[Cosine]
| "cosine"
| angle

|===

> For {l2-norm}alized vectors (unit vectors), thus their length image:l2norm_is_1.svg["The l2-norm of vector v equals 1"], both Euclidean and cosine similarity functions produce the same similarity ordering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For {l2-norm}alized vectors (unit vectors), thus their length image:l2norm_is_1.svg["The l2-norm of vector v equals 1"], Euclidean and cosine similarity functions produce the same similarity ordering.
```

[[indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean]]
=== Euclidean similarity

Euclidean similarity is useful when the _distance_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.

A valid vector for a Euclidean vector index is when all vector components can be represented finitely in {ieee-754} single precision.

Euclidean interprets the vectors in Cartesian coordinates.
The measure is related to the Euclidean distance, how far two points are from one another.

> However, that is unbounded, and less useful as a similarity score.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, that is unbounded and less useful as a similarity score.
```

Euclidean similarity bounds the square of Euclidean distance.

image::euclidean_similarity_equation.svg["The Euclidean of vector v and vector u is defined as 1 over the quantity 1 plus the square of the l2-norm of vector v subtract vector u, which exists in the bounded set of real numbers between 0 exclusive and 1 inclusive."]

[[indexes-vector-similarity-cosine]]
=== Cosine similarity

> Cosine should be used when the _angle_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cosine is used when the _angle_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.
```

For example, each word or token in a text is typically represented as high-dimensional vector where each dimension represents a certain aspect of the word’s meaning.
Words that are semantically similar or related are often represented by vectors that are closer to each other in this vector space.
This allows for mathematical operations like addition and subtraction to carry semantic meaning; for example, the vector representation of "king" minus "man" plus "woman" might be close to the vector representation of "queen." In other words, vector embeddings can be said to be a numerical representation of a particular data object, capturing its semantic meaning.

The embedding for a particular data object can be generated by for example the https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai[Vertex AI] or https://openai.com/[OpenAI] embedding generators, which can produce vector embeddings with dimensions 768, 1024, 1536, etc.
These vector embeddings are stored as `LIST<FLOAT>` properties on a node, where each dimensional component of the vector, is an element in the `LIST`.

> A Neo4j vector index can be used to index nodes by `LIST<FLOAT>` properties valid to the index.

Author: This last sentence may want a slight reword. It feels like there are too many `index`es
